---
title: 3D Button
description: Buttons can come off the page
date: 2025.05.14
tag: "#showcase"
---

<style>
    .front::before{display:none;}
    .front::after{display:none;}
    .bottom{
        background:transparent;
        border:0.1rem dashed var(--teal);
    }
    .bottom::after{
        background:transparent;
        border:0.1rem dashed var(--plum)
    }
    .bottom.isolated{border:none;}
    .bottom.isolated:after{display:none;}
    .right{
        background:transparent;
        border:0.1rem dashed var(--teal);
    }
    .right::before{
        background:transparent;
        border:0.1rem dashed var(--teal);
    }
    .right.isolated{border:none;}
    .right.isolated:before{display:none;}
</style>

# {{$frontmatter.title}}

<Badge :text="$frontmatter.date" />
<Badge :text="$frontmatter.tag" />

Click on the button below to witness a very neat effect that makes the button feel like it goes into the page. Let's breakdown how it works:

<ThreeDButton />

## HTML setup

One div needed, we will use the `::before` and `::after` pseudo-elements to create the
'sides' of the button

```html
<button class="three-d">3D button</button>
```

## CSS `<button>` styling

The `.three-d` class applied to `<button/>` is defined as follows:

```css
.three-d {
  --size: 10px;
  --negative-size: calc(-1 * var(--size));
  --half-size: calc(var(--size) / 2);
  --negative-half-size: calc(-1 * var(--half-size));
  --quarter-size: calc(var(--size) / 4);
  --deg: 45deg;
  --teal: hsla(180, 40%, 50%, 1);
  --plum: hsla(320, 45%, 45%, 1);
  position: relative;
  margin-top: 1rem;
  color: white;
  padding: 1rem 2rem;
  background: linear-gradient(90deg, var(--teal) 0, var(--plum) 100%);
  font-size: 2rem;
  font-family: "Arial";
  border: none;
}
```

- `--size` sets up a base value we can adjust later to programmatically modify downstream attributes using the value that help to keep our button looking 3D.
- `--negative-size`, `--half-size`, `--negative-half-size`, `--quarter-size` are pre calculated values to evenly adjust the overall button in attributes used on the pseudo elements.
- `--deg`, will be for skewing the bottom and side elements of the 3D button.
- `--teal`, `--plum` are colors that have good contrast on black and white backgrounds we will use.
- `position:relative` is important to control where the `::before`, `::after` elements will ultimately be placed.
- `background: linear-gradient(...)` needs to start with the `90deg` value so the gradient goes from left to right (default is top to bottom). Then we transition from the color `teal` to `plum`.

<button class="three-d front">Front</button>

## Bottom side element setup

This sets up the bottom part of button for the 3D effect:

```css
.three-d::before {
  left: var(--half-size);
  bottom: var(--negative-size);
  width: 100%;
  height: var(--size);
  background-color: var(--teal);
  transform: skewX(var(--deg));
}
```

Let's look at some of these calcuations.

- `transform: skewX(...)` creates the correct shape for a 3D effect on the bottom of the button. Skewing on the x-axis will change the left and right sides of the `::before` element.
- `left` calculation pushes the element to the right just enough so the top-left skewed corner touches the left side of the `<button/>` element.
- `bottom` would normally start the `::before` element inside the `<button/>` element, but the calculation resulting in a negative value shifts it down into place exactly at the bottom-left corner of the `<button/>` element.

On the left below is the skewed shape in isolation and on the right the borders of the `<button/>` element have been dotted in.

<div style="display:flex; gap:2rem">
<button class="three-d bottom isolated">Bottom</button>
<button class="three-d bottom">Bottom</button>
</div>

## Right side element setup

```css
.three-d::after {
  top: var(--half-size);
  right: var(--negative-size);
  width: var(--size);
  height: 100%;
  background-color: var(--plum);
  transform: skewY(var(--deg));
}
```

Similar calculations happen here but oriented to the right element. Below we have on the left the `::after` element in isolation and on the right borders dotted in.

<div style="display:flex; gap:2rem">
<button class="three-d right isolated">Right</button>
<button class="three-d right">Right</button>
</div>

## Enabling the animation with `transition`

```css
.three-d,
.three-d:before,
.three-d:after {
  transition: all 0.2s;
}
```

No complex keyframe animations needed here since we are doing a simple _not-pressed_ -> _pressed_ state change on the button which is perfect for `transition`. The 3 elements involved will work in unison and use `all` attributes to simplify declarations needing to made for each animated piece. Animation duration is `0.2s` and by default our timing function is `ease`.

## When you actually click

To make this interactive we need to display motion during the `::active` pseudo-class state (a.k.a when the button is actively pressed) among all the elements `<button/>`, `::after`, `::before`

```css
.three-d:active {
  transform: translate(var(--half-size), var(--half-size));
}
.three-d:active:before {
  left: var(--quarter-size);
  bottom: var(--negative-half-size);
  height: var(--half-size);
}
.three-d:active:after {
  top: var(--quarter-size);
  right: var(--negative-half-size);
  width: var(--half-size);
}
```

Variable usage comes in to play heavily here to take out a lot of the potential `calc` statement and keep things "DRY". These changes are what give the feeling that the button is being 'pressed' into the page. Play around with initial `--size` variable to see the effect of things on the [full demo on codpen](https://codepen.io/_zan0/pen/emmxJem).

<button class="three-d">🤯🤯🤯</button>

~ Zano
